---
layout: page
subheadline: Personal Narrative
title:  "Linux Fanatic turned Windows Pragmatist"
teaser: "How could this happen? Could Windows 10 deliver the year of the Linux desktop?"
breadcrumb: false
tags:
    - post format
header:
    title: </>
    # background-color: "#1f2f44;"
    # pattern: pattern_concrete.jpg
    image_fullwidth: linux_microsoft.png
    thumb: /assets/img/apple-touch-icon-precomposed.png
    # caption: If at first you don't succeed, try again...
    # caption_url: /
footer:
    mediaplayer: false
---
<!--more-->

It was 1999, and I was a junior in high school when I installed Linux for the first time on my computer. It was a royal pain in the ass, but I enjoyed the challenge. The onboard modem did not work because it was software driven and my display was all kinds of messed up—thanks to integrated devices. Despite my inability to get my onboard soundcard working, my determination centered on getting Linux working. I had no clue what I was doing (a complete noob). My PC at the time was running Microsoft Windows 98, and I am almost sure Hewlett Packard had did not design it to run anything but Windows. Nonetheless, I was relentless in my determination to install this elusive yet foreign and fascinating operating system. But first I’d like to give you a little background on my Linux journey.

My father was an independent self-employed salesman for Mylec Street Hockey—ergo my love for ice, roller, and street hockey—and various boot companies. Around 1988, my father bought his first desktop computer, the Mac SE. However, this computer was strictly for his work to use Lotus-1-2-3 to track sales and finances. My fascination with this nascent technology would grow into an intense obsession. It did not take long for my father to foster my interests and kindle my desire to learn about the enthralling exemplar of late 80s technological achievement. The first computer game I played was Dark Castle, which we got from a local MUG member. It was interesting, but the novelty wore off—I despise repeating myself—because of my overbearing curiosity to learn how the computer worked.

What was it about this drab and now boxy device with its greyscale display with a mere 1 Megabyte of RAM? Everything! I could conceive its remarkable potential in my feeble prepubescent mind. To my parent’s dismay I was curiously destructive; often they would come home only to discover I had disassembled the television, Betamax recorder, or later a VHS player. I had to know how things worked and sometimes, to my parent’s fortune, I put some of these costly items back together. Although, I never performed such procedures on my father’s primary computer because I knew how crucial it was for his work. However, it wasn’t until my father handed-down his older Power Mac 7100 to me at a much later date that I explored the internals. The Power Mac was my first, very own computer that resided on my desk in my bedroom.

At the time, around 1994, there was this program allowed you to tinker with the Mac operating system and customize the splash screen and various other settings (mostly editing plist files). I thought it was so refreshing to personalize the operating system whereby the startup splash screen displayed “RushOS” with some absurd trailing fictitious version number—yes, I’m a dork, nerd, or preferably geek. It was fun changing settings that escaped everyday computer users. But it was not until my father got a modem for the real fun to begin.

At first, we explored slow dial-up to bulletin board systems (BBS) supported by local Mac User Groups in the local Pittsburgh area. I remember many times going with my father to these user groups, and at the time it seemed like a place for older men with yellowing beards and often faintly smelling of cigarettes to swap or sell software and old computer parts. Often there were members demoing computer games; times were different then because copies of games were freely passed out. I am sure this is how we obtained our first computer game “Dark Castle.” Completing computer games is a rare occurrence for me. Computer games never captivated me like tinkering with software, operating systems, or hardware. Nonetheless, I spent most of my time messing with system settings and customizing the user interface—small things that were amusing at such a young age.

My friends at the time had Windows machines, mainly IBM. Windows machines never impressed me like Apple's. I think it was Windows 3.1 and the constant necessity to use DOS that instilled a sour taste in my mouth. I despised DOS versus the GUI offered by Apple's Macintosh—I was young and using DOS (Window's command line) was utterly unappealing. Which is odd considering the love I developed for the Bash Shell. Moreover, in the early days of Linux, I could not avoid the Linux terminal. I can remember at first having no GUI, and I was almost overwhelmed with frustration in my attempts to get KDE to run on the Red Hat distro I bought from Barnes and Noble. Eventually, I realized it was useless on my current machine, so I built a second computer exclusively for Linux, carefully using compatible hardware. Alas, I had a working Linux box. Notwithstanding, over the years I have bounced from Linux to Windows to Mac with incessant wash and repeat cycles; however, I mostly used Linux until Windows 10. Stop it! Avoid all the fanboy criticism and tribal outrage. For the first time since I first started using Linux, I do not have a single machine running Linux natively and here is why.

I’m tired. Tired of having to fix issues to get a proper Linux machine running on my computer. I know some OEM vendors are delivering Linux on their devices, many well supported, but I was unable to divorce myself from the Redmond OS entirely. Out of convenience I always kept a Windows box or partition for work or school. Furthermore, I found myself continually tinkering with whatever Linux distro to get the job done. I have no clue how many times I have reinstalled and changed distros by nuking my computer. I became the worst of distro-hoppers, like a drug-fiend always looking for the best, because something new and shiny would arrive on the distro I was not using. And right when Linux was getting more usable than ever, Windows 10 came along. Again, before you curse at me, flip me off, or stop reading this, let me explain--you made it this far, and the blasphemy is almost over.

I fell victim to my idealism which was hindering my ability to progress in learning software development. I was a FOSS enthusiast who evangelized for open source software and more importantly Linux. But this was starting to wear down on me because I was using open source software at the expense of time and more importantly incessant frustrations—all self-induced I guess. Yes, I was tired of paying a premium for Macs; on the other hand, I was tired of all the frequent failures and constant headaches caused by Windows. But with Windows 10 and the most recent updates (build 16299), I have a Bash Shell with access to usable and more up-to-date tools than a Mac. Yes, it is wonky, and Window's non-POSIX compliance is a little frustrating. Nonetheless, I am sure there are those out there for whom the Windows 10 Subsystem for Linux doesn’t cut it, and we should expect that as with any operating system.

But as an avionics technician by trade, I want the best tool for the job and me Windows 10 checks more boxes than Linux or Mac. Windows 10 is a massive improvement over previous versions, and I am sure all its detractors can chime in and blast me for such heretical blasphemy, especially from a Linux veteran but I do not have the time or patience for passionate idealism anymore. Surprisingly, and to many a fanatic's dismay, Microsoft has started to embrace open source software (WSL, Visual Studio Code, FreeBSD for Azure, Xamarin SDK, .NET Core, etc.). Preceding such developments, I would have thought such a statement utterly unfathomable. However, I have become more of a pragmatist at the expense of my idealism. Of course, I want to see open source software used everywhere possible, but I now view my operating system as a tool, and as with any other tool I use, I want the most efficient one available.
Furthermore, I specifically use applications only available on Windows for work, which also binds me Windows 10. I know I can run Windows in a virtual machine, but we all know how that goes. Maybe Linux has outdone itself by outshining Windows as a virtual machine guest. Notwithstanding, I can also use Docker for Windows when I reach a wall with WSL, and there is always VirtualBox. Surprisingly it seems Microsoft is changing and whether these changes are good or bad for open source software is certainly debatable; regardless of such contentions and concerns, I think we should encourage such moves irrespective of motivations.

Let’s face it, Linux is not going anywhere, it is undoubtedly the most prolific operating system (kernel) to exist—and it’s not going to fade into oblivion anytime soon. I think our idealism can cloud our thinking and perspective. Yes, I would love to see Linux replace Windows and Mac OS as the most dominant desktop operating system; however, let us not forget the plethora of Linux victories. Maybe it’s not so calamitous if we never see the “Year of the Linux Desktop.” Linux dominates so many sectors and industries, and that is why Microsoft was compelled to add WSL to Windows 10--they saw the writing on the wall. As much as it pains me, Microsoft may have solidified the “Year of the Linux Desktop” with its WSL. Let us not forget, if Linux disappeared then the internet would cease to exist, the majority of cellphones would turn into bricks, IOT would become relics, nuclear submarines would sink, military drones fall from the sky, commercial airlines crash, self-driving cars stall, and supercomputers become space heaters. Microsoft and Apple pale in comparison with the breadth and vastness of Linux implementations. Linux has, unarguably, undoubtedly, and undeniably revolutionized our world, and as the youngest of all its competitors and the most humble beginnings on September 17, 1991, that is truly phenomenal. Linux revolutionized technology and continues to do so. So, just maybe, just a little bit, we can accept that Microsoft brought us the “Year of the Linux Desktop.”
